[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The siddhis are the various
kind of psychic powers that are
available.
And they're fine, but we're
told not to get stuck on them.
If you touch them,
then you'll get caught.
>> Energy is not a plaything.
It should come to
the hand who wants
to help others, not to show
his power to others, no.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If we as humans contain
the entire universe within us,
then we possess the heart of
a lion, the grace of a swan,
and even the flight of a bird.
>> A siddhi,
S-I-D-D-H-I, siddhi,
is an attainment
or a perfection.
That's the translation
from Sanskrit.
>> Siddhi simply means
an accomplished goal,
so a siddhi means something
that's been perfected.
>> And the notion is that once
you have achieved a certain
level of ability in meditation,
and also this Samyama approach
of using intention along
with the meditative state,
that it causes things to happen.
>> You know, the capacity for
becoming so heavy that nobody
can move you, the capacity for
becoming so light that you fly.
>> Becoming really small,
becoming really big,
becoming invisible.
>> The ability to bilocate,
to appear here and in Delhi
at the same time.
>> Be able to grab
things from another room,
all these kind of strange
things that don't quite fit
the Western idea
of psychic powers.
>> So from our perspective,
it causes powers to occur.
Some are what we would
call exceptional mind-body
connections, so things
like super-healing
of yourself and of others,
being able to drink poison
and having no effect on you.
Levitation is kind
of a mind-body effect
because it's your mind and
your body is doing something.
>> They exist in the literature
and in tradition because people
have experienced them.
>> If you've read books like
"Autobiography of a Yogi,"
Yogananda talks about meeting
people who had that capacity.
>> The emergence of these
supernormal powers while
following the Eightfold
Path, or any yogic path,
diligently is stated in other
matter-of-fact terms in classic
yoga texts, such as
Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras."
>> The siddhis are first
kind of closely analyzed
in Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras."
In the third
chapter, he explains
how to get them, saying
that if you practice
this three-fold meditation on a
particular thing, the planets,
or the sky, or a
part of your body,
or so forth, you will get
this particular power.
>> While Patanjali doesn't
discourage these supernormal
states, he also makes it clear
that the siddhis are potential
impediments to the goal of yoga.
>> And yoga has always been
closely associated with
the siddhis.
And it's clear that he
doesn't see it as a bad thing
if you strive directly to get
these supernatural powers.
He goes through
20 or 30 of them.
So why would he do that if he
thought it was a bad thing?
And it does say
about three of them
that they are not to be
pursued, that the direct aim
for those ones is a hindrance
to the final goal of yoga.
But he doesn't say
that about the others.
So it's a hard one to understand
because later texts certainly
do say that pursuing siddhis
directly is a bad thing,
is an obstacle to the
ultimate goal of yoga.
But Patanjali's not so clear.
>> My sense of it is, probably,
at a certain period in history,
at a certain period in Indian
society no one disbelieved
in these powers,
in these siddhis.
And I think collective
consciousness
is incredibly powerful.
I think people actually
really could do things
that we don't see now
because we don't have
this sort of critical
mass of total faith
in those possibilities.
So if consciousness is creating
reality moment to moment,
why shouldn't that be possible?
In my view, anything's possible.
But the question is,
is it significant?
And the answer in
the tradition is no.
No, it's not any
more significant
than any random thing.
>> The siddhas in the tradition
that I come from were extremely
eccentric yogis, all of
whom had major yogic powers.
So a siddha is one who has
the full complement of what
are sometimes defined
as supernatural powers,
paranormal powers--
for instance, answer the
prayers of their devotees
such that diseases are cured.
Miraculous occurrences
happen just
by the master giving a blessing.
I'll tell you an amazing story.
My guru's guru was once sitting
in his room in Ganeshpuri,
India, outside Mumbai.
And he suddenly raised
his hand, and cried out,
and made a gesture like
this at a plane that
was flying by overhead.
And several days later, one of
his devotees came from Mumbai
and said he'd been on this plane
that was flying from Mumbai
to Chennai.
And suddenly, the plane
started to fall out of the sky.
And there was this
feeling as though a hand
came and held the plane up.
So that's the kind of story
that is told about siddhas.
>> Samayama is a method that
is talked about in the "Yoga
Sutras," which is said to
give rise to special powers,
siddhis.
So it's a combination
of what we would
think of in the West
as concentration plus
meditation plus samadhi.
And then Sanyama is a
slightly different approach
where once you've achieved
samadhi, full mystical union,
you put a little bit of
intention on an object.
So the object could
be another person.
It could be another thing.
It could be a concept.
And by becoming union with that
object, you gain the power.
>> In most branches of yoga,
and certainly in tantric yoga,
it was always clearly understood
that magical powers, siddhis,
vibhutis--
they go by different names--
have nothing to do with
spiritual realization.
They're just an independent
thing that can be cultivated.
Indeed, in tantric
yoga it's taught
if you want to cultivate
siddhis, which includes
not only magical powers
but things like the ability
to make lots of money, or
attract lots of lovers,
or, you know--
it's like those are all siddhis.
But it's very clear.
If that's what you
want to pursue,
it's very unlikely that
you'll be spiritually realized
in this lifetime.
You're essentially deferring
that until the next lifetime.
>> Thought not to be magical
in nature but, rather,
ordinary human abilities,
siddhis take years,
even lifetimes, of practice and
only show up when consciousness
has reached a supreme
level of development.
>> First of all, what
is consciousness?
So one way of thinking of
it is simply awareness.
That's like the mystery is,
how am I aware of anything?
How am I aware of myself?
So that's consciousness,
but it's bigger than that.
So we know from
the neurosciences
that your conscious awareness
is a very thin slice,
and you have a huge amount of
unconscious processes going
on all the time.
One estimate I
read said that when
you look at the total amount
of information that's impinging
on you, you are consciously
aware of one trillionth
of what's actually there.
So through the
process of meditation,
you slowly begin to
increase that percentage.
>> My guru used to say that all
of these siddhis come to you
automatically once you have
realized your oneness with
the absolute.
He said that the siddhis
don't have to be cultivated.
They come.
They arrive naturally
to one who's
united themself
with the absolute.
>> However, you don't need
to reach full enlightenment
to begin experiencing
the gifts of the siddhis.
>> Among the things that could
arise as a result of having
an expanded consciousness,
people will start reporting
that they feel energy
in their bodies.
They feel it from other places.
They feel information
coming from objects.
Ultimately, the whole panoply
of psychic and mystical
experience, they live
in that deep space.
So the notion of something like
the chakras, energy centers
in the body, from a Western
science perspective,
that doesn't exist because
we don't have instruments
to measure it yet.
This is true in general
about subtle energies,
we call it, or
subtle perceptions.
We don't have instruments
that can nail it down.
That doesn't mean
that they don't exist.
Because it's pretty
clear that when
you have people
who meditate a lot,
they all start reporting
similar outcomes.
In fact, we did a survey
of 1,200 meditators
and asked them
questions, not along
mental health and physical
health, because that's already
pretty well understood,
but more about,
what kinds of
experiences have you
had as a result of meditation?
75% of them are talking about
things like clairvoyance,
and synchronicities,
and telepathy
simply arising spontaneously
as a result of their practice.
>> The power of consciousness
is more far-reaching than most
people would suspect.
If you want to do something like
walk on water, first of all,
you have to have some yogic
attainment and concentration
ability.
But you spend a few
years very, very vividly
and one-pointedly
imaging a disk of earth.
And then when you
master it, you can just
come to a body of water,
image a disk of earth
there just underneath the
water, and step onto that.
This is the traditional
way that it's done.
We do have first-person
reports of yogis
who could stop British
trains with their mind
by visualizing a mountain
bearing down on the train
but, again, only if
they had massive skills
in concentration, right?
In terms of whether these
things really happen, well,
in my view and experience,
consciousness creates reality.
>> Siddhis have been known among
Western practitioners as well.
For instance, there are
well-documented sightings
of St. Francis of Assisi
hovering in the air.
Telekinesis is another
example of siddhi.
In Indian culture,
it's called Indrajal,
which translates to
concentrating thought power,
giving someone the ability to
move objects or bend spoons.
>> One of the phenomena that
we've become more and more
aware of in the West is the fact
that human beings actually have
capacities that we've
come to call paranormal,
meaning beyond the ordinary.
But more and more,
we're aware that these
are capacities that
are within the range
of ordinary human experience.
And some of the ones
that more and more people
that I know experience are
a kind of clairvoyance.
It's not so unusual.
For instance, it's
probably happened to you.
The phone rings, and you know
that it's your cousin Janet.
And you pick up the phone,
and sure enough, it's
your cousin Janet.
Or you start thinking
about somebody
that you haven't
seen in 20 years,
and then there's a letter
from that person in the mail.
So these are actually
examples of siddhis,
that there is the capacity for
knowing something that you have
no sensory means of knowing, the
experience of having a thought
or having a strong
intention, for instance,
making a blessing or
wishing for something--
remember how they say, be
careful what you wish for--
and having it show
up in your life.
These are examples of siddhis
that are not that uncommon.
>> I think in the West, the way
that we think of common sense
is literally the common
senses and what they see.
And that's how much of
our physics has developed.
That's much of our
civilization has developed.
It's all based on common sense.
Science has showed us
that common sense is
a very thin slice of the world.
Every time we develop
a new instrument,
we see more of the world.
So it's not too
surprising that if you
have traditions that
are specifically
going inside subjectively
and expanding your ability
to perceive that you're
going to start seeing things
that other people can't see.
This also is relevant to the
notion from, mostly from,
Eastern philosophy but
from the West as well,
about where does the
physical world come from?
What gives rise
to it, especially
in light of subjectivity?
So we have awareness.
We have consciousness
in the head.
Neuroscience thinks
it's in the brain,
like a computer in there, and
it's generating it somehow.
Nobody has any idea
how that would work.
But that's a
Western perspective.
You take a more of a
idealist perspective
or a Vedantic perspective, it's
because consciousness was here
first.
It's really the
base of everything,
and the physical world
comes out of that.
If that is true--
and this comes out of the
meditative traditions.
I think the reason
why it comes out
of the meditative traditions is
because the further down, like
the more and more you expand
your ability to be aware,
not just senses but just
awareness in general,
the more you begin to understand
that you and the universe
are really not different.
I think that's the basic idea
that comes out of Vedanta.
You and the consciousness
are the same, Mahatma equals
Brahman
>> Institutions like
Esalen, founded in 1962,
have been supporting alternative
methods for exploring human
consciousness for decades
and have reported many
well-documented cases of
extraordinary psychic abilities
and paranormal phenomena.
>> I've been up to Esalen.
And there has been
a sustained study
of psi phenomena at Esalen as
has been going on for some 100
years in the United States.
My own mother was
one of the subjects
studied by JB Rhine at Duke
University in the 1930s.
She was clairvoyant.
And they had done a
nationwide talent search,
and she was a student at
the University of Buffalo.
And they flew all these kids
in to Duke for a semester.
And they did the very famous
test of five cards, you know,
the square, the triangle, the
circle, and the squiggles.
And she paired remarkably
well with this woman.
They always got like over 80%.
And they did it first face to
face, and then room to room,
screen to screen, room to
room, building to building.
And, yeah, it's all
in that research
that JB Rhine
published-- so, yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The transformative,
and even magical,
powers of words is recognized
in spiritual traditions all over
the world.
The word "spell" comes from
Proto-German "spellen,"
meaning "to tell."
And the word "abracadabra"
was originally
a Hebrew word which
Kabbalistic practitioners
use to mean, "I create
according to my word."
Mantras are among the
most ancient of these word
formulations and can also be
used for magical purposes.
>> Mantras can be
tools for meditation,
for calming the mind.
And then they can
be, essentially,
the equivalent of
magical spells that are
accomplishing specific tasks.
Where you receive a mantra
from a guru or master who
has infused it with some of the
energy of their own awakening,
and they received it from
their teacher who infused it
with some of the energy
of their awakening,
those are considered the
most powerful mantras
because those
mantras help activate
the energy of waking
up in your system
at a kind of transmental
level, at a level beyond what
the rational mind
can comprehend.
Because mantras partake
of awakened consciousness,
the degree of your
own awakeness will
determine the power with which
the mantra is able to operate.
>> The text I worked on for
my PhD has a what's called
a mantra dhara.
So that's like a sort of
cryptic riddle or puzzle
from which you
extract the mantra.
And If you repeat that mantra
hundreds of thousands of times,
then you will achieve various
magical powers and so forth.
But also your mind will expand
and become one with the ether.
So that's kind of seen as being
equivalent to enlightenment.
There are lots, and lots, and
lots of texts teaching mantras
which can be used for kind of
black magic, supernatural ends,
how to repeat this mantra
100,000 times whilst offering
this into the fire, and, yeah,
your neighbor's goat will
fall over.
Or something like
that, you know?
Sometimes it's as basic as that.
It's kind of
mumbo-jumbo black magic.
>> The ultimate goal of that
mantra is self-realization.
But to get there,
this may come to you.
You become very concentrated.
People start liking you.
Maybe money will come to you.
You become successful.
Different types of
things will happen
as you go through
different stages,
through different chakras,
through different chis,
different levels
of concentration.
Every day, you wake
up to a new world,
new experiences, new abilities.
[CHANTING]
>> While most scholars agree
the development of lower siddhis
or psychic powers is largely
a waste of precious time
and effort, the allure of the
siddhis has led to many means
of trickery.
>> The idea of the siddhis--
and they're powerful things--
show there's a
very long tradition
in every culture of people who
fake these things because they
know it will delight people.
And there's also a
whole thread of people
who fake these
kinds of powers, who
make it a very
blurry distinction
as to whether they're
real or not real.
So if you go to a magician
who does illusions onstage,
you know that that's fake.
It doesn't matter
how good it looks.
You know it's fake.
But if you see somebody
on the street doing it,
and they don't look
like a magician,
and they don't sound
like it, and everything,
it's very hard to tell.
However, in the "Yoga Sutras"
and in other traditions,
there is a very
strict prohibition
about demonstrating the
powers that you gain.
So if you gain real
powers of these types,
whether it's simple
telepathy or levitation,
there it specifically said
in one of the "Sutras,"
do not demonstrate this--
and for good reason.
The reason is that
power is seductive.
And the yogis knew
this long ago.
You gain a certain power,
and you're excited about it.
You want to demonstrate
it to people.
So there's two reasons
not to do that.
First of all, other people
will begin to worship you,
and your ego will
become inflamed,
and then you become Darth Vader.
And the other is
that it deflects
from the original purpose of
yoga, which is not the powers.
It was enlightenment.
So the very people,
as a scientist,
who I want to study
in the laboratory,
they follow the prohibitions.
So only on a few
occasions have I
worked with people who have
long traditions in the siddhis,
and can probably do them,
who worked with experiments
under controlled conditions
and did extremely well.
So in one case, I saw a
really, really good result
in the laboratory.
And I knew this guy came
from a Himalayan tradition
where they study
the siddhis, and he
had been doing it for 70 years.
This was an experiment looking
at this quantum measurement
problem with the
movement of light.
So he was able to change
the behavior of light, which
was in a shielded room next
door, simply by sitting
there and meditating.
So I asked him, how
did you do that?
How did you make this
system change at a distance?
And all he would do was
smile because you're not
supposed to demonstrate
it, which he kind of did
in a controlled environment.
But he certainly wasn't going
to tell me how he did it.
So I don't know.
>> One of the puzzling pieces
of yoga is that if you do yoga,
it's guaranteed you're going
to look a little bit better.
You're also going to gain
a degree of mastery that
will surprise others.
I mean, it cannot be denied
that change comes with yoga.
Yoga leads to this
wonderful place of samadhi.
But the question
becomes, what does
one do, having had this
wonderful moment, what William
James called that moment of
the conversion of the heart,
what do you do?
You're given many choices.
And as you re-enter the world,
you can construct that world.
You can sort of spin
that world in a way that
can be for the greater good,
or you could spin that world
to your own advantage.
>> There's a story about a great
saint who's trying to cross
the Ganga River.
And there's a yogi
sitting on the bank.
And the yogi says, you know,
I can cross that river just
by willing it, and gets up,
and flies across the river,
and appears on the other bank,
and then comes back and says,
what do you think of that?
And the yogi says,
well, that's very nice.
But I can get across
the river by paying
sixpence to the boatman,
so why would you
waste your life learning
how to fly across the river?
And that, I think, is
the way the great yogis
talk about siddhis.
They're not worth the effort.
>> Across a river is
not that big of a thing.
It's impressive if
you're impressed
by those type of things,
or it's kind of sad
that you've wasted
all this time.
That same effort
and meditation you
could have accomplished
the goal of life,
the self-realization,
god-realization back
to the source, the
supreme experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Believe in the
world of illusion.
When we say the
world is Maya, this
is what it means, that you
believe in this mindset which
doesn't exist at all.
>> It is helpful for this
illusion for us to have this
conversation.
But ultimately,
it's an illusion,
the linear progression of time.
What was cutting-edge
is no more.
So at every evolutionary
stage, the elder beings who
will start having
these experiences,
they have to find each other.
And now as you start
finding each other,
you start having conversations.
That's how we shape
the new world.
>> It's not about how
many books you read.
You can read all the
books in the world,
have all the information
in the world,
and not know anything because
you only can know something
when you've experienced it.
>> They call it
practice for a reason.
You've got to do it.
You've got to find a way
to uncover what's in there.
And this is not something
we get from someone else.
Someone can turn the lights on
and show you what's in there.
But then the lights
go off again,
and you have to find
your way back in.
>> If you practice it and you
do it consistently on a daily
basis, you will have an
experience that will open up
your awareness and
knowledge that's all yours.
>> My first realization,
I saw two birds flying.
And I never saw birds flying
the way I saw on that day.
That was my realization.
Then it became my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The end result of
all of our sadhana,
of all of our
spiritual practice,
of all of our meditation,
yoga, whatever we're doing,
it's all about actually
connecting with our soul
so that we're
connecting soul to soul.
>> The last mantra of the
Rigveda is [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Let us speak alike.
Let us think alike.
Let us walk together.
>> I believe that all the
systems of yoga on this planet
are very helpful now and that
we're needing that to help
shift the frequency of
our thinking and feeling
as the human species.
So now's a good time for us
to find a discipline that
makes sense, to bring
a level of devotion
to it so that we can usher
in this age of peace and joy
and light.
It doesn't matter what
kind of yoga you do.
Just do yoga.
Just do yoga because
that's what's
going to bring us together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]